WIP: Trimmmmmmmmming (#443)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript: content/03.results.md

Importantly, all analyses and manuscript writing were conducted openly throughout the research project, allowing any researcher in the world an opportunity to contribute.

The process for analysis and manuscript contributions is outlined in **Figure {@fig:Fig1}C**.
First, a potential contributor proposed an analysis by filing an issue in the GitHub analysis repository.
Next, project organizers or other contributors with expertise provided feedback about the proposed analysis (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}C**).
The contributor then made a copy (fork) of the analysis repository, to which they added their proposed code and results.
The contributor formally requested inclusion of their analytical code and results to the main OpenPBTA analysis repository by filing a pull request (PR) on GitHub.
All PRs to the analysis repository underwent peer review by organizers and/or other contributors to ensure scientific accuracy, maintainability, and readability of code and documentation (**Figure {@fig:Fig1}C-D**).

> Importantly, this peer review process entailed two or more analysts running the same code within the same Docker&reg; [@https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2600239.2600241] container to ensure reproducibility of results derived from a specific data release.

Author: I think that was more to emphasize using the same data, but I think we can purge.

I updated this to "ran" to rid of another word!

### Molecular Subtyping of OpenPBTA CNS Tumors

Over the past two decades, experts in neuro-oncology have worked with the WHO to iteratively redefine the classifications of central nervous system (CNS) tumors [@pubmed:11895036; @doi:10.1007/s00401-007-0243-4].
In 2016 [@doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1545-1], molecular subtypes driven by genetic alterations have been integrated into these classifications.

> Since CBTN specimen collection began in 2011 before molecular data were integrated into classifications, the majority of OpenPBTA tumors lacked molecular subtype information at the time of tissue collection.

Author: well - I think that this is being collected routinely now, so this refers to pre-2020/2021 when these new subtypes were being created.... let me think about this one

> Since CBTN specimen collection began in 2011 before molecular data were integrated into classifications, the majority of OpenPBTA tumors lacked molecular subtype information at the time of tissue collection.

Author: made this general "tumors"

> Moreover, the OpenPBTA does not yet feature methylation arrays which are increasingly used to inform molecular subtyping and cancer diagnosis.

Author: tricky - as we _just_ performed this on 1800 tumors, but did not want to integrate here last minute...so, we can say PBTA for now since hopefully is published soon!

> Therefore, we created analysis modules to systematically consider key genomic features of tumor entities described by the WHO in 2016 or Ryall and colleagues [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2020.03.011] for low-grade gliomas (LGGs).

Author: maybe we remove "to subtype LGGs" since now that I read it, it sounds like we _only_ subtyped LGGs ...

| Tumor of sellar region                  | CRANIO, ADAM                             | 27       | 27     |
|                                         | Total                                    | 577      | 644    |

Table: **Molecular subtypes generated through the OpenPBTA project.** Listed are broad tumor histologies, molecular subtypes generated, and number of patients and tumors subtyped within OpenPBTA. {#tbl:Table1}

### Somatic Mutational Landscape of Pediatric Brain Tumors

We performed a comprehensive genomic analysis of somatic SNVs, CNVs, SVs, and fusions across 1,074 tumors (N = 1,019 RNA-Seq, N = 918 WGS, N = 32 WXS/Panel) and 22 cell lines (N = 16 RNA-Seq, N = 22 WGS), from 943 patients, 833 with paired normal specimens (N = 801 WGS, N = 32 WXS/Panel).
Tumor purity across PBTA samples was high (median of 76%), though we observe cancer groups with lower purity: SEGA, PXA, and teratoma (**Figure {@fig:S3}A**).

> Unless otherwise noted, each analysis was performed for diagnostic tumors using one tumor per patient.

Author: yes.

The top 50 mutated genes (see **STAR Methods** for details) in primary tumors are shown in **Figure {@fig:Fig3}** by tumor type (**A**, bar plots), with co-occurrence scores illustrated in the heatmap (**B**).
As expected, _TP53_ was the most frequently mutated gene across the OpenPBTA (8.7%, 58/668), significantly co-occurring with _H3F3A_ (OR = 30.05, 95% CI: 14.5 - 62.3, q = 2.34e-16), _ATRX_ (OR = 23.3, 95% CI: 9.6 - 56.3, q = 8.72e-9), _NF1_ (OR = 8.26, 95% CI: 3.5 - 19.4, q = 7.40e-5), and _EGFR_ (OR = 17.5, 95% CI: 4.8 - 63.9, q = 2e-4), with all of these driven by HGGs and consistent with previous reports [@doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2017.08.017; @doi:10.1093/neuonc/noaa251; @doi:10.1038/ng.2938].

In embryonal tumors, mutations in _CTNNB1_ significantly co-occurred with mutations in _TP53_ (OR = 43.6 95% CI: 7.1 - 265.8, q = 1.52e-3) as well as with mutations in _DDX3X_ (OR = 21.4, 95% CI: 4.7 - 97.9, q = 4.15e-3), events driven by medulloblastomas as previously reported [@doi:10.1038/nrc3410; @doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.1670].

> Mutations in _FGFR1_ and _PIK3CA_ significantly co-occurred in LGGs (OR = 77.25, 95% CI: 10.0 - 596.8, q = 3.12e-3), consistent with previous findings [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.1670; @doi:10.1186/s40478-020-01027-z].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_FGFR1_ and _PIK3CA_ mutations significantly co-occurred in LGGs (OR = 77.25, 95% CI: 10.0 - 596.8, q = 3.12e-3), consistent with previous findings [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.1670; @doi:10.1186/s40478-020-01027-z].
```

Of HGG tumors with mutations in _TP53_ or _PPM1D_, 53/55 (96.3%) had mutations in only one of these genes (OR = 0.17, 95% CI: 0.04 - 0.89, q = 0.056).
This trend recapitulates previous observations that _TP53_ and _PPM1D_ mutations tend to be mutually exclusive in HGGs [@https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2938].

We summarized broad CNVs and SVs and observed that HGGs and DMGs, followed by medulloblastomas, had the most unstable genomes (**Figure {@fig:S3}C**).
By contrast, craniopharyngiomas and schwannomas generally lacked somatic CNV.

> Together, these CNV patterns largely aligned with our estimates of tumor mutational burden (**Figure {@fig:S2}H**).

Reviewer: We can use the acronym at this point!
```suggestion
Together, these CNV patterns largely aligned with our TMB estimates (**Figure {@fig:S2}H**).
```

We identified chromothripsis events in 31% (N = 12/39) of DMGs and in 44% (N = 21/48) of other HGGs (**Figure {@fig:Fig3}D**).
We also found evidence of chromothripsis in over 15% of sarcomas, PXAs, metastatic secondary tumors, chordomas, glial-neuronal tumors, germinomas, meningiomas, ependymomas, medulloblastomas, ATRTs, and other embryonal tumors, highlighting the genomic instability and complexity of these pediatric brain tumors.

We next assessed the contributions of eight previously identified adult CNS-specific mutational signatures from the RefSig database [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5] across tumors (**Figure {@fig:Fig3}E** and **Figure {@fig:S4}A**).
Stage 0 and/or 1 tumors characterized by low TMBs (**Figure {@fig:S2}H**) such as pilocytic astrocytomas, gangliogliomas, other LGGs, and craniopharyngiomas, were dominated by Signature 1 (**Figure {@fig:S4}A**), which results from the normal spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine process.
Signature N6 is a CNS-specific signature which we observed almost universally across tumors.

> Drivers of Signature 18, _TP53_, _APC_, _NOTCH1_ (found at https://signal.mutationalsignatures.com/explore/referenceCancerSignature/31/drivers), are also canonical drivers of medulloblastoma, and indeed, we observed Signature 18 as the signature with the highest weight in medulloblastoma tumors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drivers of Signature 18, _TP53_, _APC_, _NOTCH1_ (found at https://signal.mutationalsignatures.com/explore/referenceCancerSignature/31/drivers), are also canonical drivers of medulloblastoma, and indeed, we Signature 18 had the highest signature weight in medulloblastoma tumors.
```

Signatures 3, 8, 18, and MMR2 were prevalent in HGGs, including DMGs.
Finally, we found that the Signature 1 weight was higher at diagnosis (pre-treatment) and was almost always lower in tumors at later phases of therapy (progression, recurrence, post-mortem, secondary malignancy (**Figure {@fig:S4}B**).

> This trend may have resulted from therapy-induced mutations that produced additional signatures (e.g., temozolomide treatment has been suggested to drive Signature 11 [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2014.07.052]), subclonal expansion, and/or acquisition of additional driver mutations during tumor progression, leading to higher overall TMBs and additional signatures.

Author: let's keep this for now - I tend to like having discussion / thought sentences in here to remove some "dryness" from the results

### Transcriptomic Landscape of Pediatric Brain Tumors

The majority of RNA-Seq samples in the PBTA cohort were prepared with ribosomal RNA depletion followed by stranded sequencing (N = 977), while the remaining samples were prepared with poly-A selection (N = 58).
Since batch correction was not feasible (see **Limitations of the Study** and **Figure {@fig:S7}A**), the following analyses were performed using stranded samples only.

#### Prediction of _TP53_ oncogenicity and telomerase activity

> To understand the _TP53_ phenotype in each tumor, we ran a classifier previously trained on TCGA [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] to calculate a _TP53_ score and infer _TP53_ inactivation status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand each tumor's _TP53_ phenotype, we applied TCGA-trained classifier [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] to calculate a _TP53_ score and infer _TP53_ inactivation status.
```

Indeed, we observed higher scores in 8/10 tumors from LFS patients (N = 8 patients)(**Table S3**).

> Although we observed low _TP53_ scores in two tumors from LFS patients (BS_DEHJF4C7 with a score of 0.09 and BS_ZD5HN296 with a score of 0.28), we confirmed from pathology reports that both patients were diagnosed with LFS and had a pathogenic germline variant in _TP53_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although two tumors from LFS patients had low _TP53_ scores (`BS_DEHJF4C7` at 0.09 and `BS_ZD5HN296` at 0.28), we confirmed from pathology reports that both patients were diagnosed with LFS and had a pathogenic germline variant in _TP53_.
```

> In addition, the tumor purity of these two LFS tumors was low (16% and 37%, respectively), suggesting the classifier may require a certain level of tumor purity to achieve good performance, as we expect _TP53_ to be intact in normal cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two LFS tumors also had low tumor purity (16% and 37%, respectively), suggesting the classifier may require a certain level of tumor content for accurate performance, as _TP53_ should be intact in normal cells.
```

We posit that these transcriptomic scores can be utilized to infer _TP53_ function in the absence of a predicted oncogenic _TP53_ alteration or DNA sequencing in general.

> We used gene expression data to predict telomerase activity using EXpression-based Telomerase ENzymatic activity Detection (`EXTEND`) [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9] as a surrogate measure of malignant potential [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9; @doi:10.1093/carcin/bgp268], such that higher `EXTEND` scores infer higher telomerase activity.

Reviewer: @jharenza this needs to be changed - wrong verb is used here

While we did not find that tumors with _TERT_ promoter (TERTp) mutations (N = 6) had significantly higher telomerase activity scores than non-mutated tumors (Wilcoxon p-value = 0.1196), we observed that `EXTEND` scores significantly correlated with _TERC_ (R = 0.619, p < 0.01) and _TERT_ (R = 0.491, p < 0.01) expression (**Figure {@fig:S5}B-C**).

> Since catalytically-active telomerase requires a combination of full-length _TERT_, _TERC_, as well as accessory proteins [@url:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9751630], we expect that `EXTEND` scores may not be exclusively correlated with _TERT_ alterations and expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since catalytically-active telomerase requires a combination of full-length _TERT_, _TERC_, and certain accessory proteins [@url:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9751630], `EXTEND` scores may not be exclusively correlated with _TERT_ alterations and expression.
```

I feel like something is _missing here_? what else do we expect it's correlated with?

Author: Ah, this sentence is saying EXTEND scores are not solely due to TERT since telomerase is made up of many proteins

Author: how about this wording - changed above?

> Next, we found aggressive tumors such as HGGs (DMGs and other HGGs) and MB had high `EXTEND` scores (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}D**), while low-grade lesions such as schwannomas, GNGs, DNETs, and other LGGs had among the lowest scores (**Table S3**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While aggressive tumors such as DMGs, other HGGs, and MB had high `EXTEND` scores (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}D**), low-grade lesions such as schwannomas, GNGs, DNETs, and other LGGs had among the lowest scores (**Table S3**), supporting previous reports that more aggressive tumor phenotypes have higher telomerase activity [@doi:10.1007/s13277-016-5045-7; @doi:10.1038/labinvest.3700710; @doi:10.1007/s12032-016-0736-x; @doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00372.x].
```

These findings support previous reports of a more aggressive phenotype in tumors with higher telomerase activity [@doi:10.1007/s13277-016-5045-7; @doi:10.1038/labinvest.3700710; @doi:10.1007/s12032-016-0736-x; @doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00372.x].

#### Hypermutant tumors share mutational signatures and have dysregulated **_TP53_**

We further investigated the mutational signature profiles of hypermutant (TMB > 10 Mut/Mb; N = 3) and ultra-hypermutant (TMB > 100 Mut/Mb; N = 4) tumors and/or derived cell lines from six patients in OpenPBTA (**Figure {@fig:Fig4}E**).

> Five of six tumors were diagnosed as HGGs and one was a brain metastasis of a MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma tumor.

Author: Not sure about starting a sentence with a fraction and using numbers for numbers <10 - let me think how to rephrase

Signature 11, which is associated with exposure to temozolomide plus _MGMT_ promoter and/or mismatch repair deficiency [@doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0525-5], was indeed present in tumors with previous exposure to the drug (**Table {@tbl:Table2}**).

> We detected the MMR2 signature in tumors of four patients (PT_0SPKM4S8, PT_3CHB9PK5, PT_JNEV57VK, and PT_VTM2STE3) diagnosed with either constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD) or Lynch syndrome (**Table {@tbl:Table2}**), genetic predisposition syndromes caused by a variant in a mismatch repair gene such as _PMS2_, _MLH1_, _MSH2_, _MSH6_, or others [@doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107627].

Author: there are other genes in the MMR list, so these 4 are not complete.

This is not surprising since an estimated 49% of germline _PMS2_ variants in patients with CMMRD and/or Lynch syndrome are VUS [@doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107627].

> Interestingly, while the cell line derived from patient PT_VTM2STE3's tumor at progression was not hypermutated (TMB = 5.7 Mut/Mb), it solely showed the MMR2 signature of the eight CNS signatures examined, suggesting selective pressure to maintain a mismatch repair (MMR) phenotype _in vitro_.

Author: updating this for clarity

From patient PT_JNEV57VK, only one of the two cell lines derived from the progressive tumor was hypermutated (TMB = 35.9 Mut/Mb).
This hypermutated cell line was strongly weighted towards signature 11, while this patient's non-hypermutated cell line showed a number of lesser signature weights (1, 11, 18, 19, MMR2; **Table S2**), highlighting the plasticity of mutational processes and the need to carefully genomically characterize and select models for preclinical studies based on research objectives.

> We observed that signature 18, which has been associated with high genomic instability and can lead to a hypermutator phenotype [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5], was uniformly represented among hypermutant solid tumors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signature 18, which has been associated with high genomic instability and can lead to a hypermutator phenotype [@doi:10.1038/s43018-020-0027-5], was uniformly represented among hypermutant solid tumors.
```
